+++
Description = ""
date = "2019-06-11T16:00:00+01:00"
title = "lowRISC at Week of Open Source Hardware"

+++

![WOSH logo](/img/WOSH_logo_640w.png "WOSH logo")

Pretty much the whole team is in Zurich this week for the RISC-V Workshop and
inaugural Week of Open Source Hardware, with a [packed
programme](https://fossi-foundation.org/wosh/) that got off to a start today and
which runs all the way through to Friday afternoon. 

This morning lowRISC board member, Professor Luca Benini, gave a RISC-V Workshop
keynote entitled, [Energy efficient computing from Exascale to MicroWatts: The
RISC-V
playground](https://tmt.knect365.com/risc-v-workshop-zurich/agenda/1#keynotes_energy-efficient-computing-from-exascale-to-microwatts-the-risc-v-playground).
Our friends and close collaborators at [PULP
Platform](https://pulp-platform.org/) are giving a number of talks this week
and, we’re pleased to say, so are members of the lowRISC team!

On Thursday 13th there will be a morning session dedicated to [Open Source
Licensing](https://fossi-foundation.org/wosh/#licensing) and at 10:50 Alex
Bradbury will be presenting [a lowRISC experience
report](https://fossi-foundation.org/wosh/#event-abstract-5), immediately
following which he’ll then be participating in a panel discussion moderated by
the [FOSSi Foundation](https://fossi-foundation.org/)’s Stefan Wallentowitz.
Later the same day at 16:10, Google engineer and lowRISC board member, Dom
Rizzo, will be speaking about [Google and the Free and Open Source Hardware
Community](https://fossi-foundation.org/wosh/#event-abstract-7).

The following day on Friday 14th at 09:20, Philipp Wagner will be giving a talk
entitled, [Ibex and The Mountain of Open Participation: How lowRISC develops its
Ibex CPU core and lets everyone
participate](https://fossi-foundation.org/wosh/#event-abstract-2). Then Philipp
will be taking to the stage for a second time at 14:40 to give another talk on
[Python-powered hardware verification with
Cocotb](https://fossi-foundation.org/wosh/#event-abstract-4).

![lowRISC enamel badge](/img/lowRISC_enamel_badge_640w.jpg "lowRISC enamel
badge")

If you’re in Zurich this week please do say hello and if you can’t spot us from
the team photo [on the website](https://www.lowrisc.org/about/) — it already
needs updating! — be sure to follow the [Twitter
feed](https://twitter.com/lowrisc) for team updates and also be on the lookout
for people wearing a lowRISC pin.

_Andrew Back_
